---
layout: post
title: "What Are We Reading For?"
subtitle: "How Reading Less Helped Me Learn More"
author: "Tristan Misko"
modified_date: "2023-01-15"
---

### The Mystery of the Bookless Year
The year 2022 marked for me a low ebb in both the amount of time I spent reading and the number of books I finished.  An old friend of mine actually confronted me in disbelief about my Goodreads status.  I read five books.  Five.  I can count them on one hand.  

My immediate response to this paltry tally is a kind of shame.  I read over (sometimes well over) 40 books per year 2017 to 2021, and I would say that I pride of myself on being a reader.  My inattention to reading over the last year brings that identity under threat and raises a number of important questions.  What happened in 2022 that kept me from reading?  What happened in years before that got me reading so much? And finally, what will be the role of reading in my life going forward?

### A Portrait of the Pedant as a Young Man
Perhaps you’re expecting the typical song and dance about algorithms, the attention economy, and digital distractions—and they’ll have their part in the story—but those weren’t the central themes of my 2022.  To the contrary, the cultivation of a deeper understanding of and a healthier relationship with my own attention has been perhaps my biggest forward step in the past year.  What’s changed is my fundamental orientation toward intellectualism and the space it ought to occupy in my life.

I realize that’s quite a loaded statement, so I’ll do my best to unpack it with a little biography.  Starting in middle school, I found myself playing the part of the classic nerdy loner.  The role chose me more than I chose it.  I was a bright kid, sure, but something about the way I spoke and the words I used gave people the impression that I was smarter than I actually was.  I came off as pretentious and pedantic without entirely meaning to be, and, since my social skills and emotional maturity were, let’s say, suboptimal, I found it convenient for me to lean into the nerdy loner role without asking too many questions.

Leaning into it set me down a path that was highly conducive to my intellectual development.  In seventh and eighth grade I got good at maths purely out of insecurity that I wasn’t good enough.  I took up reading in ninth grade because that seemed like something intelligent people did.  Naturally, I picked some big books to start because they would seem impressive (David Halberstam’s The Fifties was the first, for APUSH extra credit over the summer).  I willed myself to do it: I remember making big Excel sheets to compute how many of pages I had to read per day over each summer.  I lived and breathed books and practice problems and lectures and educational YouTube videos.  It was everything.

It wasn’t clear to me then and it’s not clear to me now why I was feeling so insecure, what I was trying to prove with all this, or to whom I was trying to prove it.  It’s just how I was.  But somewhere along the way I felt I lost track of, overcame, or perhaps just repressed my toxic motivations for pursuing these intellectual endeavors.  I felt that I could honestly say that I just loved literature, math, physics, and philosophy in themselves.  They had become a familiar home, a place to channel my curiosity, to work and to play.  And my home they remain.

### Attention and Distraction  
The changes to my thinking around attention began in February, as so many of my good thoughts do, with an episode of the Ezra Klein Show.  Ezra begins the show with this little preface: “Life is the sum total of what we pay attention to.  That’s it.”  That quote, for some reason or another, echoed through my head all year long.  It’s not particularly profound: in fact, it’s the kind of trite truism I would let pass unquestioned nine times out of ten.  But, nearing the end of my senior year, and wrangling every day with the question of what I’d like to do after college, with what I wanted my life to be, I found in his formulation a promise of agency.   This matter-of-fact reminder that my attention would well nigh mechanically determine the course of my life became a common mental refrain for me.  In moments when I was feeling anxious about the future, I would reframe my anxiety in terms of what I could do in the present, which is to say ,what I could pay attention to.  It was no panacea, but it was certainly helped.  

Transforming the problems of self-definition and action into the space of attention regulation has proved a fruitful intellectual move for me.  I’ve had an ambivalent relationship with my own attention for as long as I can remember.  My parents tell me that I would spend hours on end arranging cars into perfectly straight lines and building block towers when I was a toddler.  As I got older, I grew obsessed with LEGO, and could spend hours prototyping, building, and remodeling planes and spaceships.  Other things—especially reading and math in elementary school—just didn’t grab me, and I had trouble paying attention to them.  As with reading and math, so too for people at that age, which no doubt contributed to my loner status growing up.     

I first encountered of the “eroding attention spans in the attention economy” narrative in my early teenage years, around the same time I got a phone. I learned the hard way that I’m particularly susceptible to the siren song of doom-scrolling the infinite streams of content on the internet, and my awareness of the attention-deficit narrative brought about some (perhaps productive) self-loathing that has ultimately made me very protective about my attention, especially in digital spaces.  In order to protect myself, I found that I have to disengage completely with anything that is too interesting for my own good.  Among these for me are TV Shows, Video Games, and Reddit.  There is no healthy dose.  Even a little taste will inevitably send me headlong down a hyperattentional rabbit hole of binging behavior followed by that special kind of general misery that comes only from overloaded reward circuits.  These experiences of losing control of my attention to some piece of engaging content, of failing to focus on something because I wasn’t interested by it, of intrusive diversions and distractions, were so fundamental to my experience of the world that, while I was aware that I was dealing with them, I never really stopped to question them.

Later last spring, Jen, my partner, suggested that I might have ADHD.  I initially felt some resistance to the diagnosis (more on my thoughts about the discourse around mental health another time), but I will admit it’s hard to read the previous two paragraphs alongside a list of common symptoms of ADHD and not jump to some conclusions.  Formal diagnostic criteria notwithstanding, the notion that I am engaged in a constant struggle to regulate and direct my attention rings true to me, and I’d imagine that it’s some shade of true for a lot of people these days.

All of this thinking about my attention and how I regulate it made me much more, well, attentive to myself and in particular to my own embodied emotional experience.  Instead of riding unquestioningly afloat my undulating thoughts as I had most of my life, I found myself questioning why a certain thought or other came in at a particular moment.  I became more aware of feelings of resistance, boredom, and insecurity that I had simply acted on unquestioningly in years past.  I began to take notice of the emotional undercurrents beneath surface of my thoughts.

### And A Rock Feels No Pain
The conclusion of all my navelgazing was deeply unsettling to me.  I came to believe that what felt so inviting about the intellectual world I had invented for myself by the end of high-school was the way in which I could disconnect myself from the emotions I never learned to face.  My mind could be so fully absorbed in a topic that it could for a moment forget that its attached to—or rather just is—my embodied bag’o’meat self.  This intellectualism as avoidance echoes the conception of ADHD as a kind of coping mechanism that Dr. Gabor Maté explains on the episode “If society is making us sick, how can we heal?” of The Gray Area with Sean Illing.  All things considered, I’m left questioning what role intellectualism has played and ought to play in my life.

Looking back in particular across my years of peak reading with attention to what I was thinking and feeling at the time, it seems so obvious to me now that I was unhappy and in desperate need of escape.  When I leaf through what I wrote in 2017 and 2018, it’s relentlessly gloomy.  I was struggling to finish college applications on time, or else struggling to adjust to the new social environment of college.  I was lonely, but I wasn’t seeking people out.  I was reading, or else writing, or else studying.  

If you’d asked me what was important in life, what I wanted from it, I would have given you some half-baked nonsense about knowledge and epistemology.  My philosophical thinking at the time was absolutely beleaguered by the threat of determinism to my own agency and thereby to my very notion of self.  There were days (I’m not kidding about this) that I had trouble getting out of bed because I was so worried about the inescapable truth that I am simply a collection of deterministically evolving atoms, and that with those atoms rests the “decision” to get out of bed, so I’ll wait for them to “decide.”  Looking back on it now, might not this obsession with agency and determinism have been an intellectualized reaction to the trouble I was having regulating my attention?  Might not my feelings of loneliness and isolation have left me with nothing but a cold intellectualism to cling to for dear life?

A decisive change in the winds happened in 2019 when I found my way into my first romantic relationship.  It was mainly long distance, mediated exclusively through letter-writing.  But being in a relationship—even the rather emotionally dysfunctional relationship that it was—began the process of redirecting my attention toward people and less toward abstraction.  As the winds shifted, I continued reading a ton and intellectualizing everything, but I calmed down, for lack of a better phase, and rounded out a bit.  I developed some really meaningful friendships.  I got into swing dancing and found a community. 2019 through 2021 saw a tapering off of my philosophical anxieties, not because I resolved the tensions through pure reason, but because the issues didn’t weigh so heavily when life was going well.  

For the record, I do realize I sound a bit like space alien when I say I never paid attention to people until I was nineteen, but if I’m being honest I didn’t start taking subjective or sensory experience seriously (in a philosophical and, more importantly, attentional sense) until around this time.  I was an objectivist through and through, and what other people experienced or god forbid felt was less than irrelevant to me.  There were facts and scientific truths, and then there was all the human drivel.  Of course I felt and enjoyed things and disliked others, but these were not areas worthy of philosophical consideration.  I was too busy reasoning myself out of existence to take seriously even my own sensations, feelings, emotions.

I don’t think that I’m alone or even all that unusual in this.

### The Best Year of My Life
So you’re probably saying, “Look, that’s all well and good but after 2000 words of babbling you still haven’t explained why you only read five books in 2022.”  And the answer is, plainly enough, that I was busy. I got into a much more emotionally mature relationship that demanded a lot more of my attention.  I’ve been brushing up and improving my software engineering skills and applying to jobs.  I’ve been spending lots more unstructured time with friends.  I started bouldering.  I’ve continued dancing.  I’m getting better at cooking.  I’m playing lots of music.  

What all of these things have in common is that they are things that I am doing.  I’ve never been less defined by things I’m thinking about.  I don’t feel the need to “have a theory” of everything anymore.  I recognize the limits of what can be known in that way.  

### Warm Intellectualism
What I've learned, my plans for the future.  
